[MUSIC]
>> Kyle Simpson: Let's talk
about our topic today.
What on earth is
functional-light programming?
Completely made up term that I came up
with to try to describe what I hope
is slightly more approachable,
almost remedial,
look at this much bigger and much more
complex notion of functional programming.
Some of you may be very, very familiar
with functional programming already.
And for those of you that are, for
those of you that feel like you've cut
your teeth on functional programming, you
were a lisper back in the 70s or whatever.
If that's you listening to the tame,
I apologize that some of this
may feel very remedial to you.
But, I think we have a problem, because
I think functional programming is one of
the most powerful set of techniques that
we have in programming, but I think it
has been presented in a way that is
completely off putting to most developers.
And I think if you cornered somebody who
has been steeped in the traditions in the
academics around functional programming.
If you really ask them
to admit they would say,
it was a pretty high barrier to entry.
It's like a really, really powerful tool.
It's like walking into a workshop and
seeing a chainsaw with all kinds of fancy
features on it and things like that.
Maybe it's digital and
has an LCD display, and you're like,
I don't have any clue how to do that.
I just got a piece of wood I need to cut
and I have no idea how to use this thing.
It's a high learning curve.
So the workshop today,
my goal is to try to get at some
of those fundamental principles.
Without wrapping any of it,
in any of that sort of academic
notational terminology, things like that.
We're not gonna talk about monads.
To be honest with you I'm not even fully
sure I understand what a monad is.
I can kind of fumble around with some
of those sorts of things because
I can't even tell you how many talks that
claim to be the talk that's gonna teach
functional programming.
And I do not claim that this talk is going
to teach you functional programming,
this workshop is not going to teach
you functional programming but
it is going to teach you the basis upon
which functional programming can be built
from the observational perspective rather
than from the academic perspective.
That's why I call it
functional-light programming.
These are like walking into a workshop and
saying, well,
I don't understand that crazy
complicated chainsaw thing.
But I just have a tiny little
piece of wood that I need to cut.
Okay, here's the little handsaw.
It's much much simpler,
it's much more remedial.
It doesn't take a lot of learning.
You can figure out how to do this.
The principles of a handsaw are the same
principles upon which a chainsaw is build.
But obviously, the chainsaw is much more
complex because it's designed to handle
much more complex problems.
So what we're doing here is a start.
It's not all of functional programming,
but
it's a start towards understanding
where we need to go if we do want to
be better with our functional
programming practices.
This represents my journey to
understanding functional programming
if I really have to boil it down.
These are the sorts of things that,
without ever understanding any of
the terminology, I gleaned some of
these concepts from programming and
from looking at other people's code.
And I'm just trying to simply lie
some of that stuff out to help you
gain a better understanding.
So let's quickly look at
what we're going to talk
through over the next several hours.
First, we're gonna talk about
what pure functions are, and
even before that we have to understand,
obviously, what a not pure function is.
So we're gonna look at the notion
of not pure versus pure functions.
We're gonna look at composition.
Already starting to sound
like a slightly fancy word,
like a slightly fancy terminology.
I promise I'm gonna help you
understand what that word is.
I chose that word as opposed to
a number of other words that would make
no sense at all.
The famous quote about monads is like,
they're just a bi factor in
the category then they'll factor or
some crazy thing like we're not
gonna use any of that stuff.
Okay, so
don't get too scared with the terminology.
Immutability, the notion that we
have something that doesn't change.
We treat it immutable,
we can even make it immutable.
So we're gonna look at what immutability
is, just from a very basic sense.
Closure.
Closure is probably the most important
programming concept ever invented.
I know that's a big claim to make
cuz there are a whole bunch of great
programming concepts that have been
created and we use lots and lots of great
tools in our programming, but
I would say that closure is the most core.
The most important, the first place
that we really need to grasp.
So closure, we definitely wanna
take a look just briefly,
at understanding what that means and
how we use that.
Some of you may have already
seen other courses and
other books I've written on it.
I go into that topic in much more detail,
we're not gonna go into a lot of detail
about it but just to present to you,
the way that we use closure from
the functional programming perspective.
Recursion, is another one of those topics
that has usefulness outside of functional
programming, but is also very heavily
related to functional programming.
So I wanna have a basis
understanding of recursion.
Recursion is one of those things I know
that is very easy to kinda scared of.
I've talked to the students,
the college students, recently, who
have told me things like I just can't even
possibly wrap my brain around recursion.
And that's a shame.
I'm saddened by that.
I'm saddened by this notion that we can't
figure out some basic
way of explaining this.
So this is my attempt to help you kind
of get your brain a little more wrapped
in that direction.
Now we're gonna look at a set of things,
these are going to build on higher order.
So slightly higher order patterns on
top of these basic fundamentals but
they really are kind of the main
takeaway from our workshop today.
So we're gonna look at
taking a list of values and
performing a set of
transformations on them.
For those of you that have heard
of functional programming before,
transformation is done with maps, so
we're gonna look at transformation and
then look at the map.
Then we're gonna look at exclusion,
excluding items from a list.
Paring down a list to a smaller set
of items based upon some condition,
that goes by the name of filter.
Then we're gonna look at composing items
from a list into either a smaller list or
even down to a single value.
Composing values together.
Now, I don't mean
composing lists together.
We're not actually gonna take
a very close look at that.
But that's pretty straightforward as well
because we can concatenate two lists
together.
So there are fundamental
list operations that really
don't necessarily show up a ton of
times in functional programming.
The composition here,
what we mean is composition of the items,
putting things together.
That goes with the name reduce.
And finally, list iteration which
in JavaScript we call forEach.
Other frameworks will call it each or
things like that.
In particular that last one I'm
mentioning not because that's actually
kind of frowned upon in
the functional programming world.
We're gonna find out that list
iteration is actually an impure action.
So from a purely theoretical perspective,
functional programming
they turn their eyes, turn their nose
up at something like list iteration.
So I just wanna show you
the notion of list iteration, so
that we understand why it's when we
watch Sesame Street as kids, and
they're like one of these
things just doesn't belong.
List iteration's gonna be that
thing that just doesn't belong, but
we need to understand the other
things before we understand why.
List iteration doesn't belong.
So that's our set of topics
that we're gonna go through.
There are several exercises that
we'll spend some time on and
we will take some breaks
throughout our discussion as well.